<< What is MCPP >>

MCPP is a C/C++ preprocessor with the following features:

  1. Implements all of C90, C99 and C++98 features.  It has the highest
    conformance.
  2. Accompanies a validation suite to test comprehensively the C/C++
    preprocessor.  When it is applied to the existing preprocessors,
    MCPP shows outstanding results.
  3. Has a variety of accurate diagnostic messages.  This allows
    examination of most preprocessing problems of source, like potential
    bugs or portability problems.
  4. Has various #pragma directives for outputting debug information.
  5. Supports the various encodings of multi-byte characters for Japan,
    China, Taiwan and Korea.
  6. Highly portable.  Supports many compiler systems on Unix-like
    systems and DOS/Windows.  It can replace resident preprocessor of
    the compiler system.
  7. Preprocessors of various behavior specifications can be generated
    from the source.
  8. Is free software.
  9. Full documentations in Japanese and English are attached.

MCPP is probably the best C preprocessor in the world.

MCPP was selected for the 2002 "Exploratory Software Project" of the
Information-Technology Promotion Agency, Japan (IPA) by the project
manager, Yutaka Niibe.  During the period of July 2002 - Feb 2003, the
development was progressed by IPA's funding.  MCPP has continued to be
selected as the "Exploratory Software Project" for 2003 by the project
manager, Hiroshi Ichiji.  From June 2003 through Feb 2004, the
development was proceeded with IPA's funding.  With its achievements,
the author was evaluated as one of the highest rank programmers by PM
Ichiji.

Please read mcpp-summary.pdf for the overview of MCPP and Validation
Suite.

All files except mcpp-summary.pdf are normal text files.  The new line
is [LF].  Also, the encoding of Japanese documents in 'doc' directory is
EUC-JP.

I would like to hear from many C programmers for reviews, comments and
the interest to participate in development.

Please read INSTALL for how to install MCPP on your system.

Kiyoshi Matsui <kmatsui@t3.rim.or.jp>

